for the founding queen
sharing her nest with all these rivals
seems like madness
but the economics of desert survival is
a numbers game
and for the moment at least this
communal life
is the key to her future
each queen now lays her first batch of
tiny eggs
each no bigger than a pinhead
many new nests contain two or three
queens
limiting the initial brood to less than
100 eggs
but these ten queens have produced well
over 300 eggs
and when they hatch the colony will
become
an instant superpower
for the founding queen this is the main
advantage to taking in lodges
[Music]
if the eggs are not kept clean and
coated with antibiotic saliva
they would quickly be smothered by fungi
and rot away
the eggs soon hatch
fed by the queens the voracious larvae
grow quickly and then pupate
a few weeks after the eggs were laid the
first
tiny pale workers emerged from these
silky cocoons
all ant workers are female
and sterile unable to reproduce
themselves
their sole purpose in life is to serve
the queens
they darken as their bodies become
harder
and then they are ready to take up their
duties
some stay underground tending to the
queens
and to the remaining brood
others head for the surface for a first
look at their strange new world
the entire army is mobilizing
the raiding parties head out to the last
place they had found food
where they had pinned down the few
winged termites
[Music]
the bearing they've taken is leading
them straight towards the termite mound
itself
ants and termites have been adversaries
for over a hundred million years
now their armies of today are on a
collision course
but without any physical contact the
blind army
is as unaware of the termites ahead as
the termites are
of the approaching ants
they begin to swarm over the outside of
the termite towers
that for the moment appear to them to be
just mounds of dried mud
[Music]
guards are posted while others explore
every crevice for any sign of food
first contact the ants know there's
something here
and change direction towards the alarm
signal they mess around
the guards alert for any unpleasant
surprises
this is unknown territory anything could
be lying in weight down there
a worker gingerly explores the gaping
hole
and a scouting party lays a scent trail
for others to follow
activity increases an assault is on
other ants have found the termites
foraging tunnels
and scramble inside the tunnels are
narrow and not at all like the open
spaces driver ants prefer
termite soldiers with enormous jaws and
heads prepare to check the incursion
a soldier termite confronts the invaders
with a threat display
but it's not going to impress a driver
hand
the ants penetrate deep into the nest
and the residents intensify their
[Music]
warning
first blood is to the termites
but the tunnel guards are in danger of
being overrun
the ants break through the first line of
[Music]
defense
to lash the leaves together gangs of
workers
pull as one
bridges are built helping ants move
quickly around the site
[Music]
to hold their construction together they
rely on the youngest members of the
colony
grubs
[Music]
when they're in their final stages of
development
they produce strands of silk
and make the perfect glue gun
[Music]
in just a few hours their new home is
complete
their nest happens to be on a mango farm
but it's no ordinary orchard
mr boonchu has recruited this army of
miniature warriors
to defend his fruit
they'll eat any pests
and by tying these strings between mango
trees
mr boonchu helps the ants get to new
foraging grounds
expanding their empire and protecting
his orchard
healthy ant colonies mean fewer
pesticides
and the weaver ants give the farmer
something else
mr boonchu likes to harvest their eggs
[Music]
so
he takes only a little from each nest
separating the ants so they can return
to their colony
[Music]
these eggs are a thai delicacy
and a favorite dish of the north
[Music]
by working with wildlife farmers in
northern thailand
are able to benefit from nature's bounty
and help it flourish
this must be the easiest place in the
world to get lost
i'm in the great sea of sand in the
eastern sahara
behind me to the south wave upon wave of
dunes stretch
for hundreds of miles it will be hard to
imagine
a landscape with fewer features to it
and with temperatures rising to 50
degrees centigrade during the day
getting lost here could be lethal and
yet
this is the home of one of the most
remarkable animal travelers
an ant that regularly leaves its home in
these
sands and sets out on the longest
overland journey
made by any insect it's called
cataglyphus and it comes out during the
middle of the day
when other insects die from heat
exhaustion
cataclysm searches for these casualties
when it's so
hot that even it seeks relief from the
burning surface
when it can
at first it forages randomly over the
sand
but when it finds its exhausted prey
astonishingly
it returns in a dead straight line to
its nest
it's so hot in the desert that even
cataclyphus has to get back as quickly
as possible to its nest
if it's not to risk death
these foraging journeys are equivalent
in human terms to a trek of
40 miles over completely featureless
territory
and yet the ants even if they wander
about in searching for their food
are able to return directly to their
nest
how do they achieve that well have a
closer look at one
leaving on one of these journeys
it keeps stopping and making a turn
stop and turn stop
and turn
as it turns it looks up at the sun
checking its position
it moves on again
and checks the sun and the pattern of
polarized light
it can measure the distance between
stops and it always takes a bearing on
the sun
at every one of them
when it eventually finds food a quick
calculation
and it knows exactly the shortest way
home
if you can use a beacon that's with you
wherever you go like the sun
then of course you're no longer
restricted to your familiar
home ground you can venture into unknown
territory
you can go long distances to find new
feeding grounds
great journeys are now possible
it's day two and the mass evacuation is
underway
the ants march along well-worn tracks
originally the foraging trails between
the old nest and the swarm front
but now the main roads along which queen
and colony will pass
their trek is about the length of two
football pitches laid end to end
and they're not traveling empty-handed
each ant carries a lava
or a pupa hung below her body the
equivalent of
us running a marathon while carrying a
sack of potatoes
and not stopping for arrest
[Music]
the entire immigration can take up to
three days
it seems chaotic but every ant in this
extraordinary melee knows exactly what
she's doing
giant soldiers with their massive jaws
line the route
so the workers with their precious cargo
can travel safely
along a living avenue
they're passing at a rate of 250 000
ants
an hour
some unwittingly carry infiltrators even
tiny ants are host
to even tinier mites
[Music]
the invading army is building in numbers
so
traveling with her subjects is the queen
at two inches long she's the largest ant
in the world
and she's a new queen when her mother's
colony grew too large
and divided half the workers switched
their allegiance
and now accompany her on her first
emigration
her enormous bulk has been coaxed along
the trail
and now she takes her place at the heart
of the nest
the queen is in her palace and what a
palace it's become
it's a living bivouac
a nest made entirely of ants
all its internal walls are made of ants
all its corridors and chambers
constructed of living bricks
[Music]
and when they're all assembled in their
new stronghold
they form one of the largest
concentrations of ants
on earth
protected by these living walls are the
nurseries
where wave after wave of brood carriers
deliver their load
you